samples: Matter: light_bulb: Add support for AWS IoT (#12876)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: samples/matter/light_bulb/README.rst

    This sample is self-contained and can be tested on its own.
    However, it is required when testing the :ref:`Matter light switch <matter_light_switch_sample>` sample.

> The sample can also communicate with `AWS IoT Core`_ over a Wi-Fi network using the the nRF7002 DK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sample can also communicate with `AWS IoT Core`_ over a Wi-Fi network using the nRF7002 DK.
```

    :start-after: matter_door_lock_sample_factory_data_start
    :end-before: matter_door_lock_sample_factory_data_end

.. _matter_light_bulb_aws_iot:

AWS IoT integration
===================

The sample can be configured to communicate with `AWS IoT Core`_ to control attributes in supported clusters on the device.
After the setup, the sample will mirror these attributes in the AWS IoT shadow document.
This makes it possible to remotely control the device using the `AWS IoT Device Shadow Service`_.

> The supported attributes are ``onoff`` and ``levelcontrol``.

Reviewer: These are not attribute names. I would recommend the following change:
```suggestion
The supported attributes are ``OnOff`` from the ``OnOff`` cluster and ``CurrentLevel`` from the ``LevelControl`` cluster.
```

The following figure illustrates the relationship between the AWS IoT integration layer and the light bulb sample:

.. figure:: /images/aws_matter_integration.svg
   :alt: Sample implementation of the AWS IoT integration layer

   AWS IoT integration layer implementation diagram

The following figure illustrates the interaction with the AWS IoT Shadow Service:

.. figure:: images/aws_matter_interaction.svg
   :alt: Interaction with the AWS IoT Shadow Service

>    AWS IoT Shadow Servic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   AWS IoT Shadow Service
```

AWS IoT setup and configuration
-------------------------------

To set up an AWS IoT instance and configure the sample, complete the following steps:

1. Complete the setup and configuration described in the :ref:`lib_aws_iot` documentation to get the host name, device ID, and certificates used in the connection.
#. Set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_AWS_IOT_BROKER_HOST_NAME` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_AWS_IOT_CLIENT_ID_STATIC` options in the :file:`overlay-aws-iot-integration.conf` file.
#. Import the certificates mentioned in the :file:`light_bulb/src/aws_iot_integration/certs` file.
#. Build the sample using the following command:

   .. code-block:: console

      west build -p -b nrf7002dk_nrf5340_cpuapp -- -DOVERLAY_CONFIG="overlay-aws-iot-integration.conf"

> #. Flash the firmware, boot the sample, and commission the device to the Matter network.
>    See `Commissioning the device`_ for more information.
> #. |connect_kit|
> #. |connect_terminal_ANSI|

Reviewer: I would slightly change the order.
```suggestion
#. Flash the firmware and boot the sample.
#. |connect_kit|
#. |connect_terminal_ANSI|
#. Commission the device to the Matter network.
   See `Commissioning the device`_ for more information.
```

#. Observe that the device automatically connects to AWS IoT when an IP is obtained and is able to maintain the connection.
#. Use the following bash function to populate the desired section of the shadow:

   .. code-block:: console

      function aws-update-desired() {
            aws iot-data update-thing-shadow --cli-binary-format raw-in-base64-out --thing-name my-thing --payload "{\"state\":{\"desired\":{\"onoff\":$1,\"level_control\":$2}}}" "output.txt"
      }

   You can also use ``aws-update-desired 0 0``, or ``aws-update-desired 1 128 (onoff, levelcontrol)``.
   Alternatively, you can alter the device shadow directly through the `AWS IoT console`_.

#. Observe that the light bulb changes state.
   The local changes to the attributes always take precedence over what is set in the shadow's desired state.

.. note::
   The integration layer has built-in reconnection logic and tries to maintain the connection as long as the device is connected to the internet.

>    The reconnection interval can be configured using the ``CONFIG_AWS_IOT_RECONNECTION_INTERVAL_SECONDS`` option.

Reviewer 2: Should this be a Kconfig option?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, this is a Kconfig option. But this is not defined in the Kconfig library, so don't link. This is the reason to keep it as backticks.

Reviewer 2: Could still have it as "the [...] Kconfig option", but it's not a blocker for me.

After a connection has been established, the sample will mirror these attributes in the AWS IoT shadow document.
This makes it possible to remotely control the device using the `AWS IoT Device Shadow Service`_.
The supported attributes are ``OnOff`` from the ``OnOff`` cluster and ``CurrentLevel`` from the ``LevelControl`` cluster.

The following figure illustrates the relationship between the AWS IoT integration layer and the light bulb sample:

.. figure:: /images/aws_matter_integration.svg
   :alt: Sample implementation of the AWS IoT integration layer

   AWS IoT integration layer implementation diagram

The following figure illustrates the interaction with the AWS IoT shadow Service:

.. figure:: /images/aws_matter_interaction.svg
   :alt: Interaction with the AWS IoT shadow service

   AWS IoT Shadow and Matter interaction diagram

AWS IoT setup and configuration
-------------------------------

To set up an AWS IoT instance and configure the sample, complete the following steps:

1. Complete the setup and configuration described in the :ref:`lib_aws_iot` documentation to get the host name, device ID, and certificates used in the connection.

> #. Set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_AWS_IOT_BROKER_HOST_NAME` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_AWS_IOT_CLIENT_ID_STATIC` options in the :file:`overlay-aws-iot-integration.conf` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_AWS_IOT_BROKER_HOST_NAME` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_AWS_IOT_CLIENT_ID_STATIC` Kconfig options in the :file:`overlay-aws-iot-integration.conf` file.
```

> #. Import the certificates mentioned in the :file:`light_bulb/src/aws_iot_integration/certs` file.

Reviewer 2: I just noticed that there is no `light_bulb/src/aws_iot_integration/certs` file, and this currently reads like such a file would be where the certificates are mentioned. Is this the target where they should be imported instead? So something like:
```suggestion
#. Import the certificates to the :file:`light_bulb/src/aws_iot_integration/certs` folder.
```

Author: jepp, the user needs to create this folder and add the certs. Your suggestion works. Ill add the folder and some dummy certs to make this more obvious.

#. Build the sample using the following command:

   .. code-block:: console

      west build -p -b nrf7002dk_nrf5340_cpuapp -- -DOVERLAY_CONFIG="overlay-aws-iot-integration.conf"

#. Flash the firmware and boot the sample.

> #. |connect_kit|

Reviewer 2: Should these steps be switched? I don't think you can flash the sample without connecting the kit.

Author: Quick search shows that this order is used in _most_ cases so it looks like a general issue.

Reviewer 2: Alright, I'll look into this as a general improvement that can be implemented outside of this PR, then.

#. |connect_terminal_ANSI|
#. Commission the device to the Matter network.
   See `Commissioning the device`_ for more information.

> #. Observe that the device automatically connects to AWS IoT when an IP is obtained and is able to maintain the connection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Observe that the device automatically connects to AWS IoT when an IP is obtained and the device is able to maintain the connection.
```

To upgrade the device firmware, complete the steps listed for the selected method in the :doc:`matter:nrfconnect_examples_software_update` tutorial in the Matter documentation.

> AWS IoT Integration

Reviewer: I'm missing here the information that Wi-Fi is the only supported networking technology and nRF7002 DK is the only supported platform. I know we have the example build command, but generally the sample can work with Thread as well, so it would be good to clearly mention that the support if for Wi-Fi only.

Reviewer 3: Added information on start of the sample docs.

===================

The sample can be configured to communicate with AWS IoT Core to control attributes in supported clusters on the device.
When properly setup, the sample will mirror these attributes in the AWS IoT shadow document.
This makes it possible to remotely control the device using the `AWS IoT Device Shadow Service`_.
The supported attributes are onoff and levelcontrol.

To setup an AWS IoT instance and configure the sample, follow these instructions:

> 1. Follow the AWS IoT library documentation to get the hostname, device ID, and certificates used in the connection: https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/libraries/networking/aws_iot.html

Reviewer: Could we reference to `lib_aws_iot` using `ref:` instead of pasting the raw link?

2. Set the CONFIG_AWS_IOT_BROKER_HOST_NAME and CONFIG_AWS_IOT_CLIENT_ID_STATIC options in :file:`overlay-aws-iot-integration.conf`
3. Import the certificates under :file:`light_bulb/src/aws_iot_integration/certs`
4. Build with :file:`overlay-aws-iot-integration.conf`:

   .. code-block:: console

      west build -p -b nrf7002dk_nrf5340_cpuapp -- -DOVERLAY_CONFIG="overlay-aws-iot-integration.conf"

> 5. Flash the firmware, boot the sample and provision the device to wifi with the chip tool (or whatever works).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Flash the firmware, boot the sample and commission the device to the Matter network.
    See `Commissioning the device`_ for more information.
```

> 6. Watch the device auto-connect to AWS IoT when IP is obtained and is able to maintain the connection.

Reviewer: Should we see it in logs? Then I would add two additional steps after flashing the firmware:

#. |connect_kit|
#. |connect_terminal_ANSI|

7. Use this bash function to populate the desired section of the shadow:

   .. code-block:: console

      function aws-update-desired() {
            aws iot-data update-thing-shadow --cli-binary-format raw-in-base64-out --thing-name my-thing --payload "{\"state\":{\"desired\":{\"onoff\":$1,\"level_control\":$2}}}" "output.txt"
      }

   `aws-update-desired 0 0`, or `aws-update-desired 1 128` (onoff, levelcontrol)
   Alternatively you can alter the device shadow directly via the `AWS IoT console`_.

8. Watch the light bulb change state.
   Note that local changes to the attributes will always take precedence over what is set in the the shadows desired state.

.. note::
   The integration layer has built in reconnection logic and will try to maintain the connection as long as the device is connected to the internet.
   The reconnection interval can be configured by changing the CONFIG_AWS_IOT_RECONNECTION_INTERVAL_SECONDS option.

> Shadow Service interaction diagram

Reviewer: Would it make sense to put these two diagrams before the test/setup steps to provide some introduction fro the customer before starting to use it? Then you could put the setup steps into separate section, like:

```
Testing Matter and AWS integration
----------------------------------
```
